Title: 
Mutation ratios of proteoglycan synthesis genes in organisms with 
specific bone classifications

Introduction: 
Proteoglycans are a variety of carbohydrate-coated proteins. 
Proteoglycans can be found in the extracellular matrix, where they are involved
in synthesizing articular cartilage, and intracellularly where they have been
recently identified to function in processes such as growth factor signalling.
The loss of extracellular proteoglycans is associated with debilitating 
diseases such as osteoarthritis and recent findings that suggest proteoglycan
to be located intracellularly have helped with gaining a better understanding 
of the consequences of proteoglycan loss. 

Proteoglycans are composed of a core protein onto which different carbohydrates
are attached. The function of the proteoglycan and its tissue presence is 
dictated by the types of surface-attached carbohydrates. For example, 
chondroitin sulfate has repeating disaccharides of glucoronic acid and 
acetylgalactosamine whereas heparan sulfate has glucoronic acid and
acetylgalactosamine repeats.

Motivation: 
As already mentioned, one of the core motivators for studying the
synthesis and origins of proteoglycan is its association with diseases. 
Further, according to recent findings that suggest proteoglycan to be secreted
intracellularly, we have additional motivation for decoding whether 
intracellular proteoglycan synthesis disruptions are associated with disease as 
well. A better understanding of proteoglycan synthesis, as it occurs in
different organisms, might help inform test organism choices for osteoarthritis
research such as studying how organisms react to the onset of osteoarthritis or
how they react to potential treatments.

How to study this:
A potential contributor to our overall knowledge of proteoglycan 
synthesis is the understanding of the origins of proteoglycan synthesis pathway
and how the genes in the pathway compare between organisms from different
classifications. Since proteoglycan synthesis is associated with bone and 
cartilage development, organisms can be classified according to bone presence - 
there are organisms that synthesize bone and cartilage, only cartilage, 
or neither of them - and environment - organisms from different 
environments, such as terrestrial versus aquatic, may exhibit different 
synthesis patterns as a consequence of genetic differences. 

What we studied:
As a consequence, we decided to test the hypothesis that genes in the 
proteoglycan synthesis pathway exhibit higher non-synonymous vs. synonymous
mutation ratios in organisms that have specific bone/cartilage traits and live
in specific environments such as aquatic or terrestrial. 
